docs: initial start of the maintainership docs under the bounty program (#1894)
asyncapi/community: docs/maintainership-guide/general-information/mentor/best-practices.md

---
title: Mentoring Best Practices
weight: 80
---

Mentors play a significant role in the success of any mentorship program—without them, mentorship simply doesn’t exist. By offering meaningful guidance, you're not just empowering contributors; you're also growing as a leader, setting the tone for future contributors, and modeling resilience, curiosity, and collaboration.

When a contributor is assigned to you, your role is to create an experience that is both supportive and transformative. To help you thrive in this role and get the most out of the program, here are some essential best practices:

### 1. **Lead with Empathy and Respect**

>    Open source brings together people from a wide range of backgrounds, cultures, and personalities. As a mentor, you may work with contributors whose traits or communication styles differ from your own. This is where empathy plays a critical role, it helps you meet contributors where they are and navigate challenges with compassion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open source brings together people from diverse backgrounds, cultures, and personalities. As a mentor, you may work with contributors whose traits or communication styles differ from your own. This is where empathy plays a critical role; it helps you meet contributors where they are and navigate challenges with compassion.
```

   
  - Foster a welcoming, inclusive, and non-judgmental environment.
  - Respect contributors’ backgrounds, learning curves, and personal ethics.
  - Celebrate small wins and remain patient through slow or uneven progress.
  - Assume good intent—people may communicate differently, but most are here to learn and grow.

### 2. **Set Clear Expectations Early**

>    A successful mentorship begins with clear alignment. Setting expectations from the start ensures everyone is on the same page and minimizes confusion down the line.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 A successful mentorship begins with clear alignment. Setting expectations from the start ensures everyone is on the same page and minimizes confusion down the line.
```

> - Define goals, milestones, and communication cadence at the start.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Define goals, milestones, and a communication cadence at the outset.
```

- Clarify what success looks like, both technically and behaviorally.
- Make sure contributors understand their responsibilities, and yours.

### 3. **Be Consistently Present and Approachable**

Reliability builds trust. Being consistently available even for quick check-ins makes a big difference in your mentee's confidence and engagement.

- Maintain regular check-ins (weekly or bi-weekly).
- Stay responsive in communication channels, especially when contributors are stuck.
- Encourage contributors to ask questions and express doubts freely.
- Promote transparency by guiding contributors to ask questions publicly in relevant project Slack channels.

### 4. **Encourage Autonomy and Growth**

Your goal as a mentor is to help contributors become independent problem-solvers. Give them the space to grow by gradually shifting from instruction to guidance.

- Guide rather than instruct, let contributors explore and problem-solve.

> - Encourage contributors to lead meetings or learnings occasionally. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Encourage contributors to occasionally lead meetings or learning sessions. 
```
